---
author: Ranjani Thiagu

---

# Another Birth {.unnumbered}

<hr>

I conceived again. Raghavun was four years old then. As months passed, I was a little tired and there was a small gap in Raghavun’s training. We continued to implement whatever we had learnt in the special sessions. I had my second delivery at my parents’ place. The different atmosphere there, the presence of more people at home, and the extra attention he got from his grandparents kept Raghavun happy. He seemed to miss his father though.

We were blessed with a baby boy. Karthik was born. Raghavun came to the hospital with his dad to see the baby. He saw his little brother on my lap. We expected him to show some reaction. But, no…. He was emotionless. He didn't look at me directly, made no eye contact. I asked him to come near me and introduced him to his baby brother. Thiagu held Raghavun’s hands and made him touch the baby. But he just pulled his hands away, became restless and ran out of the room. We didn't know what to do. Even normal children have sibling rivalry. We didn't know how autistic children would behave when the second baby came to share the attention they were receiving. But we felt we needed to do more homework on this aspect.

There was no problem as long as I stayed at my parents' home in Karur. Raghavun was taken good care of and he didn't need me for anything and totally avoided me and his little brother. After three months, Raghavun, Karthik and I packed our little bags and joined Thiagu in Bangalore. We found it really difficult to manage. By chance, I found out one day that Raghavun was not aware of dangers. He was playfully pushing the baby from the cot. Luckily I was there on time. This made me tense and I was afraid to leave them alone even for a minute. When Karthik started walking, Raghavun would come running, push him violently. We couldn't be as strict with Raghavun as with normal children and we felt it would be better to teach Karthik. The first lesson Karthik learnt was to drop everything and sit down when Raghavun approached him.

At this point I must digress and share something. Parents who find out early that their child is autistic don't go for a second child. I suppose one reason is that they think that their attention will be divided across the two children, the autistic and the normal child, which might result in a sub-optimal childhood for both children. I don't know how to articulate this better, but if parents fear this outcome, their fear comes true. Fear is a bad adviser. Another important thing which may influence the parents' decision is that they doubt if autism could be hereditary. There' s no medical evidence for such an argument, but in rare unfortunate cases, it may happen. Not all parents entertain doubts about a second child. This group believes that the sibling helps the child with autism. In our case, before we started entertaining doubts or fears our second baby was born and it was a blessing. We knew about autism in our late twenties. But Karthik has been with Raghavun from birth. I am sure both our children have influenced each other mutually and that was for good.

Life gives us experiences and throws surprises everyday. Though Raghavun was different, he had never given us any problems either. But on one unforgettable day, Raghavun started banging his forehead with his fists and started screaming. I felt a chill run through my spine. We tried to stop him from harming himself, but the bad behaviour became worse when we tried to intervene. It lasted for less than a minute and the next minute he behaved as though nothing had happened. We heaved a sigh of relief but our peace was short lived. The frequency of the behaviour increased and he hurt himself badly, banging his head against cots and walls. After such outbursts, he got very tired and simply lay down on the bed. Though he hurt himself, he never meddled with Karthik or hit anybody. Our hearts would sink whenever there was a tantrum. For Karthik, it was part of life and due to God's abundant grace, it did not affect him or his growth in any way.