---
author: Ranjani Thiagu

---

# Special Schools {.unnumbered}

<hr>
We started our next project of hunting for a good special school. It was a difficult task. There were no special schools for children with autism back in those days. The special schools admitted children with Down syndrome, mental retardation, cerebral palsy and many other conditions. All children with different conditions were in the same class and Raghavun was alone in that set up also. He was aloof and copied the unwanted behaviour of other children. We were clueless as to what to do.

Autism is a spectrum disorder. Children with other disabilities in fact learn things sooner than autistic children. Normal children understand something if you say it once. For differently-abled children you may have to say it a few times. But children with autism will not do a thing if they do not want to do it. They can follow only one command at a time. Patience is the mantra to train them. Obviously, the schools couldn’t give him complete attention as the student teacher ratio was not 1:1. He became worse and dull too. I had to accompany him to school because he didn’t interact with anyone and we were afraid to send him alone by auto. The schools also insisted that a caretaker accompany the child if he was not potty trained.

He didn’t respond when his name was called out. Just once, we tried to send him with other children in the auto. The auto driver came and informed us in the evening that he had trouble finding Raghavun at the end of the school day because he didn’t come out when called and other children had to wait. He also gave us some “free advice” to keep Raghavun at home. Raghavun never responded and made us doubt if his hearing was proper. Many parents mistake autism for deafness and waste a few precious years in giving the wrong treatment. Autistic children act as if they don’t hear you. But the truth is, they hear every word you speak.

There are many practical difficulties in accompanying our special children to school. No school allows the mother inside the classroom when they grow up. Though these children are different, they learn to take parents for granted and don’t cooperate with the teachers if we stay with them. When they are small we would be asked to be with them during training because it is our first experience and we need to know the dos and don’t s. Once we understand the condition, the mother will be asked to wait outside the classroom. It seemed a colossal waste of time to me. No useful work could be done during that time. I had to take Karthik with me as we wanted to give personal care to him and didn’t want to leave him at home with maids. I had just about enough time to cook, pack lunch and extra dresses for children as we had to spend at least six hours outside the home. We had a roof above, in the school waiting area, mostly asbestos and few chairs to sit on. On a first come first served basis, mothers who came a little early would occupy the few chairs that were available. Everyone came with a big bag like me.

Karthik and I would wait quietly. I would speak with the other mothers who waited outside. A few of them claimed that their children performed better than Raghavun and a few others were desperate and depressed about their child’s condition. I didn’t like both types. The first type made me doubt if we were on the right path, though I didn’t entirely believe their claims. At least that I could handle, the second type was worse. The association with depressed people will depress us and that is neither good for us nor for our child. For all of us, physical and emotional well-being are equally important. We should not indulge in anything that affects this balance. There are many unfortunate people in the world compared to whose problems our problems are small. An object looks big when seen in close quarters and looks tiny when seen from a distance. The same rule applies to all our worries. Moreover, worrying will not help or improve anything. I would say that the only good thing which happened to me during those long waiting hours was, I had enough or more time to think deeply about life and learned to be at peace with myself and about everything and everyone around me.

This is what I had hinted at earlier. All other trifles stopped bothering me. They looked too tiny in proportion compared to the progress we wanted to make. Karthik was growing. We were really concerned that Raghavun’s problem might affect him and therefore were careful to shield him to the extent possible. To be fair, Karthik was already missing many wonderful moments that a child of his age would rightly get. Though he was born normal, he had no other choice. But if God closes a door he does open another. From birth, as if God had taken complete care of his life, he never needed guidance from us and everything fell in place automatically as far as things in his life were concerned.

Next we come to language. We spoke Tamil at home. The language spoken in the state was Kannada and the special educators spoke English. Normal children pick up many languages simultaneously but it’s not so with autistic children. For example, when teaching the names of vegetables and fruits, if we employ a multi-lingual approach, that will confuse children with autism. Better to follow the language spoken at school for teaching purposes.

We were looking for better schools and found a place where the teacher student ratio was good. They had a play area too. This meant that Raghavun didn't have to sit in a dark corner all day long. Besides, the school authorities didn't insist that I accompany him, but preferred my being around. We liked the school. The name of the school was Vaathsalya, meaning love. In this school, Raghavun learned some discipline, rudiments of social interaction, some physical actions such as holding a cup and drinking from it, eating dry food like biscuits and cakes without external help. He also learned to be away from us for short durations. As I expected, he started reciting a few rhymes and started speaking short sentences, though not as good as before. It was still echolalia, that is, parroting what we asked him and not trying to respond to what was asked. Whatever little progress he made is worth mentioning here and the main reason for this improvement was that he was in a school all those years and the teachers there were really committed. Autistic children must definitely go to some school even if they can’t engage in academic activities like normal children.