---
author: Ranjani Thiagu

---

# Goodbye to Schools {.unnumbered}

<hr>

Raghavun was still going to school. The school had many activities to improve his concentration. It helped to have a routine. He calmed down with age, without any medication. Few parents train their children in skating, swimming, horse riding and other activities. If such activities really make the children happy, there is no harm in trying. But somebody has to accompany the child always unless one is hundred percent sure the child can be independent. In Raghavun’s case, we found out that he could not operate independently. We know what we have gone through and feel it is enough just to be peaceful and keep him peaceful. This statement is not applicable to parents of autistic children who have some potential or a lot of potential. Some special children are remarkably bright. It is very important to train them and make them as independent and self reliant as possible.

Another important aspect of being parents of an autistic child is dealing with criticisms. People sometimes pass comments without knowing the problem in its entirety. We cannot do anything about that. Our reaction to criticism is under our control. We will learn to ignore it as we grow older. But the earlier we learn to do that, the better it is. We can’t blame those who critise too. An ordinary family or a “perfect family” will have difficulty in understanding us. It is necessary to be in touch with positive people who have a special kid. Search for autism support groups. You may get suggestions that are more germane to your situation and your experience may also be of some benefit to somebody. Though we encounter curious looks wherever we go we should not avoid social gatherings. Raghavun was a part of all the events that we attended. We never left him with anyone in order to attend a function or party. If some situation demands that Raghavun cannot accompany us, my husband or myself will stay back with him and facilitate the other to attend it. Raghavun slowly learnt socially acceptable behaviours but never failed to attract the attention of people. One thing we failed to teach or couldn’t teach was eating using his hands. I made it a point to feed him when we had to eat at weddings and other functions where food is served in banana leaves in India. Now we are trying alternatives, though it is a bit late. But better late than never.

As stated in an earlier chapter, they lay their hands on their favourite food items unmindful of where they are taking them from. So my husband and myself sit on both sides of Raghavun while dining out. Or we will choose a corner seat, so that he doesn’t create any disturbance to others. As we eat simultaneously, I have to be very fast or else he gets restless. Regarding this particular thing, we feel we should have done something to make him eat on his own whenever we dined out. As he was very comfortable eating with a spoon when at home, we didn’t bother much and took it easy. But it is wrong. Teach them when they are young. Life throws surprises. There will be changes. We will be getting older and the children stronger. They should be independent, at least to take care of their basic needs when we are away from them in some pressing situations. Introduce more people to the child and look out specifically for those who genuinely care for him.

Next comes exercise. As some autistic children cannot engage themselves in any physical activity, it is our duty to ensure that they get some exercise. Raghavun loves to walk. Rain or shine, we make him walk. He has never missed his walk, no matter how bad the weather may be. Take children to quiet places to walk. When they are small, they can be taken to a children's park and made to play with the equipment there. But again, they may not wait for their turn to use a particular piece of equipment and throw a tantrum. We must choose the proper time, when there will be less number of children. Some children learn cycling. Be that as it may, they cannot be left alone on roads. We have to restrict their movement. If they really love cycling and learn without much difficulty we can teach them. We must judiciously choose the activities which if taught will be really of help to them or their caregivers in future. We have a swimming pool in our apartment. He loves water. We take him to the pool and just let him splash water and have fun. But we didn’t teach him to swim. Some autistic children swim well, yet are not at all aware of any danger. It is absolutely essential for a parent or caretaker to accompany them.

Feed them carefully. Food rich in calories and a lack of exercise make them obese. This is clearly not a good situation to be in. When Raghavun turned twenty three, the school called us and said that he must be taken for occupational therapy to some other centre. The crucial thing in the training of autistic children is catching them young. So, to make room for younger children, the schools have to take the difficult yet necessary step of sending older children out. Again the search started. We visited many centres. They had activities like candle-making, making paper plates and paper cups, and some such things which could be sold in a market and bring in some revenue. Some boys and girls could do these things with a little support. They were mostly young adults with Down’s syndrome or mental retardation. Actually it is easier to teach people with these problems. Autism is different. The centres wanted me to accompany Raghavun and assist him in learning to do these activities. I tried to do that very sincerely. After a few months I felt that the centres used us, parents, to achieve their targets. Again, I stress that there are exceptionally good centres and unfortunately the places we landed up were like this. We found no meaning in pursuing that and made one final attempt to find if the old school would keep him for a few more years. They couldn’t oblige. From that time Raghavun started being at home. It has been almost ten years now. This was the most important period in shaping him into what he is now.