---
author: Ranjani Thiagu

---

# Entering Adulthood {.unnumbered}

<hr>

Coming back to Raghavun, he continued to live in his own world but learnt essential self help skills. Occasional temper tantrums were there. He hurt himself badly on a few occasions and every such tantrum depleted his energy. As a result, progress took the form of a spiraling movement. Good days were followed by the occasional bad day. The progress he had made would be temporarily undone and we had to begin ascending the next arm of the spiral. In some children these outbursts are a routine affair and such children may need a little medication. The doctor should decide the type and dosage and the parents should be convinced that it is beneficial for their child. Parents have an intuition that is quite accurate in this regard and they must learn to trust it. With Raghavun, the tantrums were not a routine affair, but the slightest provocation was enough to get him started. We had to be constantly on our toes. When we started feeling that the frequency of tantrums had increased, we consulted a psychiatrist and took a second opinion as well. Both doctors said that his behavior was actually better than those children suffering from convulsions. Due to God's Grace he didn’t have convulsions.

For his age, Raghavun had a sedentary lifestyle as he couldn’t mingle with children and play. This absence of physical and mental activity meant that there was no way he could expend his energies. According to the doctors, his temper tantrums were an outlet for the accumulated energy. We were advised to follow some calming techniques such as exposing him to good music, giving a mild body massage, or a hot water bath in the evening. This helped to a certain extent and the gaps between successive tantrums started increasing. Peace was restored, at least for a while.

Now a different problem started. He started wetting the bed at the age of twenty. It was not an involuntary action. He did it purposely, that too several times a day. It was a nuisance. We were finding it difficult to change the bed-spread and wash all his clothes many times a day. I became tired and that showed in my face. These children understand our moods. Raghavun knew that his new behavior irritated us. He started doing it just to provoke us. We had some sleepless nights. Those were very difficult days. We informed his teacher of this behavior. She tried to correct him by being severe with him. This only had an adverse effect. Whatever we did to make him stop this habit worked negatively. We didn’t want to give up and believed that the power which watches over us would help us overcome this difficulty.

When tackling such challenging situations, the one thing that shouldn't be allowed to enter is depression. Keep that enemy outside your homes. Even if there are dull moments, never give it any room to express itself. We decided to just stop talking about the problem before him. We talked to no one about this once we made the decision. When he did it, we paid no attention to him, simply ignored him and just carried out our duty of changing his dress. This method worked miracles. As he didn’t get any response from us, he got bored and stopped it. Again we felt great relief. But the fear that he may start doing it again lingered.

Children were growing. Karthik was very understanding. He was and still is introverted. During all these years we have been particularly careful about not creating any disturbances in Karthik’ s mind. Karthik was mature for his age. His attitude towards Raghavun reflected in all his activities and helped him develop into a wonderful young man. He has a broad vision, never mistakes or judges people, tries to see things from others’ point of view, and rarely raises his voice. The things which generally interest youngsters failed to evoke any interest in him. We as parents dropped a few interests because Raghavun was not comfortable doing them. For example, watching movies in a theater, going to malls, flight travel and so on. Karthik was under no obligation to renounce these activities. Actually, we have never given him any such idea. On the contrary, we have always given him ample space to make his own decisions without worrying about Raghavun’s condition. But it so happened that he developed a detachment towards the usual amusements such as going out with friends to theaters and malls. What we did out of a sense of obligation, he did naturally. He enjoys the company of like minded people but never goes out with others except for work. We still do not know what he feels or what is at the bottom of his heart. But I am sure that Raghavun's condition has touched him. I don't know if I should be happy that Karthik is so affectionate or if I should be unhappy that he is missing out on a few small pleasures that boys of his age enjoy. We have talked to him about this and understood that it is his natural state, shall I say as natural as a flower blossoming?

We think autistic children do not have emotions. This is a wrong idea. Once, when Karthik was a one year old baby, he was crying for some reason. Raghavun came running from one of the rooms in our home. We went behind him thinking he might hurt or push Karthik. But, to our surprise, he wiped off Karthik’s tears, looked at him for a fraction of a second and left shyly. Yes, Raghavun has emotions but can’t show it.

Twenty long years passed. It was time for Karthik‘s college admission. The children were always together and we didn’t know how Raghavun was going to respond if Karthik left Madras for his studies. Due to God’s grace, Karthik got admission into IIT-Madras, one of the best institutes in India. But he had to stay in the hostel and came home only during weekends. This created a vacuum in Raghavun’s life and he missed Karthik‘s company. He wished to express that but couldn’t do so in a proper way and hence threw a tantrum whenever Karthik came home. We were helpless. Karthik came home with an expectation of spending two peaceful days at home and Raghavun’s behaviour invariably spoiled the weekends. It was nightmarish. Raghavun's next lesson started. We told him that Karthik stayed at Tapti hostel inside IIT Madras and that we had to pick up and drop him and it was a nice outing for him and all that. He listened and seemed to understand and started enjoying our visits to Karthik’s college after a year or so.